---
layout: post
title:  "Digital Humanities according to Digital Humanities"
date:   2015-12-06
categories: digital humanities
---

A while back I posted an entry to this blog entitled "What is Digital Humanities? And Why?" In it, I interpreted the meaning of emergence of digital humanities as an "epiphenomenon" of an epic and epochal encounter between the new "disruptive" and "anti-heierarchical" techno-capitalist culture represented by Silicon Valley and the "old" domain of regulated hierarchy, expertise, and (big C) Culture, still valued (or, one might say, preserved) in academia. The upshot of this interpretion was, it seemed to me, that the the digital humanities, seen from this kind of a macro-historical level, can be understood as a key cultural mediator in the broad redefinition of the meaning of "culture" in the era of internet technology.

The post represented an initial attempt to express what was interesting to me about the emerging field of digital humanities. One of the criticisms, I subsequently received regarding the text was that the question "What is Digital Humanities?" was a question that had already been sufficiently answered by digital humanists; that to ask this question had become so commonplace that it was cliche; that the "digital humanities" was already a discipline with an establishd history and core method and practice. The source of this critique also directed me to a series of texts written by Matthew Kirschenbaum, which were highly instructive and wittily written. Of these texts, Krischenbaum's "What is 'Digital Humanities,' and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things About It?" helped me to understand the reason that my text may have produced this kind of response.

In his essay, Kirschenbaum wrote in response to a widspread critique that was in fact precisely the critique that one might expect that the digital humanities might receive within the encounter that I had described in my post: namely, the charge that "digital humanities" represented the incursion of a neoliberal technocratic impulse into the cultural temple of the university. Writing as an experienced practioner in what he views as an already well-estabilshed disciplinary domain, Kirschenbaum roundly mocked this critique, accusing its exponents of crass reductionism and noting that the "'digital humanities' is in fact a diversified set of practices, one whose details and methodologies responsible critique has a responsiblity to understand and engage." (pg. 14)

Kirschenbaum's point, I think, is well-taken. It's quite true that one can't reduce either the intentions of consequences of those working in this domain to some variety of naive technological utopianism. Yet the fact that the work of digital humanitists is so frequently interpreted as a threat to what people perceive as the traditional values of humanistic critique -- however misguided -- can't I think be dismissed so easily.

At times, it's almost as if Kirschenbaum engages in the romanticism of the artist who, aghast at the brashness of the attention-seeking critic, charges the critic with the failure to understand the inner nature of the work itself. The work, Kirschbenbuam wants to say, speaks for itself; in its complexity, it evades critique: "digital humanities is work," he writes, "somebody’s work, somewhere, some thing, always. We know how to talk about work. So let’s talk about this work, in action, this actually existing work." And this appeal to respect the work, while eminently reasonable, also I think fails to acknowledge the broader impact that the work of digital humanists will eventually have.

While it is certainly not the case that digital humanities is some trojan horse, designed to introduce Silicon Valley's technocratic neoliberalism into the university, destroying it from within, it is true that the work of digital humanists is central to a shift in cultural practice, driven by rapid technological change, that is currently ramifying just about everywhere. Thus although Kirschenbaum and his peers may indeed perceive themselves to be quietly working away in some corner of the university,  what they are doing is playing around with a set of tools that have deeply altered peoples' lives within a ridiculously short time-frame, that most people find both intimidating and mystifyingly complex, and that in our contemporary culture are most visibly associated with the flashy and rebellious forms of our contemporary neoliberal economy. Small wonder that people are alarmed, therefore.

What's more, beyond this mere realm of anxious analogic comparison -- which I think is the main thing that Kirschenbaum resents -- it's also true that if computational culture continues to expand into our daily lives, as it most certainly will, what digital humanitists are doing is something that will most definitely transform our cultural world. That great variety of types of work that Kirschenbaum mentions, involves experimentaiton with practices and methods that will define what role the computational has for the practice of critique and how it might alter not just the contours but also the basic ground of culture.

Take, for example, the popular theme of what will happen to the book. The idea that books will disappear is absurd, and there are very few digital humanists that either think this or support the prospect; and yet that's not even what would need to happen for things to change radically. If the immediate future of cultural production involved, as it very likely will, simply a situation in which there *also* exists a digital cultural record -- consisting certainly of a variety of digitized, but also, possibly, of the copious informal conversations that thinkers of many varieties have always generated as they worked on their books -- well this would change this quite a bit. All those books would just be a bit less central, and this vast digital record would come to the fore.

And what would characterize this new digital record? Well, very likely it would consist of interactions and exchanges, the vast majority of which are less polished, more informal, and highly partial in their interpretive breadth. The unique authority of the book, expressed both through its linearity -- there's only one line of thought -- and through the tremendous authority and prestige of the cultural visage of the "author," would thus be offset by a vast cultural resource, growing exponentially, that was rarely final and constantly in the making.

How exactly this challenge to the authority of authors and traditional discipline would play out is hard to say, but it seems likely that the traditional access points for cultural authority and production, currently so powerful regulated by academia, will be much harder to regulate and control. We've obviously alreayd seen this outside humanities proper -- for example, in Wikipedia or in vast number of blogs like this one.Yet perhaps the most mind-bending alteration to traditional form of cultural authority will have to do with the meaning and ontology of words and texts themselves. 

For this new digital record will also be fully plastic to computational re-representation and translantion. And given the size of the size of this datomic record, what any author says at any particular moment, will need to be analyzed computationally, since there will just be too much to read, produced too quickly. We will increasingly need to take a statistical view of cultural production in order to embrace the sheer mass of it all; we will become what Franco Moretti has described in his fascinating books as "distance readers." Words, in this resource, will be part of a network; they will be "nodes" with "edges" connecting them to other words. Culture will have become a database, constantly combed by algorithms seeking different forms of represetnations for different forms of questions and answers. What may utlimtately be interesting about what is said, is not what is said itself, not the interpretation as a static authorative thing, but rather words and interpretations as a vectors of cultural understanding.

Now, considering this scenario, which is not just likely but imminentnly upon us, what self-respecting young thinker or reader, who probably grew up quietly admiring books in some quaint bookshop, wouldn't be threatened, alarmed, and alienated by this prospect? And the fact is that there are things to be concerned about here, but these concerns are wrapped up with the awkward position that 

For, the university find itself in a contradictory position between conservatism and radicalism. For it is that institution, deeply embedded in the broader power structures of our socities, that both carries the torch of the radical values of critique and constant doubt that we associate with the Enlightenment, and that today seeks to reinforce those values in a broader cultural environment shot through by a techno-capitalist culture that has turned us all into advanced cyborgic switch-nodes in a vast network. All day, we have radically sophisticated tools at our fingertips with which we shuffle a variety of cultural resources around that network: forwarding, click-buying, sharing, liking, and then, every now and then, reading for thirty minutes. So it's now wonder that so many in the humanities see themselves as holding at bay this overwhelming world of switching activity, which at cuts radicaly against the values of focused critique, of doubt carefully applied. And when these same people consider the entrance of technological tools into the humanities, they then also wonder whether this won't be too much.

The point is that Kirschenbaum is right, but he is also courting an attitude that is to rest back on the existing domain of the discipline. But to do so sets up a kind of contradiction with what is atually going on with the field, which does seems to seeks both openness and "newness". 



 need not be responded to with so much defensiveness. The fact that digital humanities is perceived to be at the center of this dispute between the values of critique and culture and technocratic neoliberalism is not actually a bad thing. Taking the view I tried to represent in my post, it's really a demonstration of the epiphenomal world-historical significance of this this field of activity. 


